Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project, interviewer Steve Fletcher, interviewees Paul
and Nicky Keeping, venue Swicker Office, date Friday the 14th of November 2015.
So Paul and Nicky, when did you first come across Swicker or its predecessor Theatre
Talleus in Wales?
Well we first met Mr Swicker about 10 years before Swicker in 1985 when you really were
the first person to befriend us when we moved to Cardiff, Steve Fletcher.
How did we meet him?
We just met in chapter, around chapter.
I think he's so nosy he came over and wanted to talk to us didn't he?
He said who are you, where are you, where have you come from, what are you doing?
And I think we were just drinking at that stage.
We might have got into a bit of happy hour drinking after that with Steve and yeah we
became great friends.
But then I suppose we saw Steve working with initially Cardiff Laboratory Theatre and then
the Centre for Performance Research and then he went off to London for a while to Chisholm
and came back and started working with Theatre Talleus in Wales.
We loved the Mad Dog and Tumshan Khatti and we got to know the Bavaiars of Gujarat and
generally had a great time.
And then of course I was working for Cardiff Council so really that first mass, although
I wasn't part of it, I saw it going through Cardiff Castle and that was really excellent.
But then after a little while there was one New Year's Day when we'd woken up with a
hangover probably and we'd had a little bit of a tiff.
Had we?
Yes.
And you came round Steve and said oh have you heard there's an induction course for
this Cardiff Samba Band which then was still relatively new and that was probably in about
1993 or something.
We tossed a coin because we weren't in a position to really rationally agree who was going to
go because we had two young kids and only one of us could go.
So we flipped a coin and...
You wouldn't have gone anyway if you'd won.
You'd have gone for a week and said oh hey, I don't want to.
And so Nicky with her sticking power became a big part of the Cardiff Samba Band for about
20 years.
And actually we still, you know, you still perform with them this summer in France, didn't
you, on Bastille Day.
But then because we went along to the first, well one of the early Sambadromes down at
Channel View and Nicky was playing with the Samba Band and for me as someone who always
really sort of felt dreadful in a dancing environment saw all these amazing blokes dancing
really well like Ian Devereux and Adrian Wiggins looked very fetching in a matching zen outfit.
And I sort of thought well if...
And I met all these cool Samba people and thought well I've got to learn how to dance
and picked up a flyer for patchoua dance and ended up doing a weekend.
After that weekend I couldn't actually get down the stairs except on my bum because I
was exercising muscles I'd never used before.
That was ages later than that, probably.
Well it was before my first mass and I think the first mass I did I think was 1994 because
I remember blue was the theme and I was dancing with a life-size puppet whose shoes were tied
to my shoes and we were doing sort of partner dancing with Fernanda and Nicky was in the
Samba Band so that was my first mass.
I had done a couple before with Daisy and Jimmy when they were tiny and so very young
they did the carnival right up until they were 15, 16 and every year they did it and
I thoroughly enjoyed it.
Yeah so I was a bit earlier and that was great fun.
And of course they've both gone on to work in that kind of lifestyle.
Daisy's an actor now and Jimmy works in films.
Still very lively both of them.
And I think they both learnt a lot.
They really enjoyed dressing up, they really enjoyed tearing down the road, they loved
winding up people on the street.
So that for them was their favourite.
But they've taken part in some of the juvets, these secret pre-carnival rioting.
They would actually no they didn't because they were too young and I enjoyed myself far
too much to allow the kids there then because it was all about just smothering yourself
in paint and having a lot of drinking, getting very loud and tearing through the town which
I thought was the best part of carnival always.
I think they did the first juvets we did because my brother and his wife were down.
I think they were looking after them and saw us doing it.
No they were part of the juvets.
Well if I'm right but that was the year that the juvets was happening in the Hayes.
There was a concert on the bandstand at the Hayes and we were supposed to tie, we were
in an underground car park or a you know like part of the St David shopping centre and we
were supposed to wait until a signal.
We come out just as the concert was finishing and you'll remember it Steve, it was an interesting
evening but what happened was we were doing jab jabs and so Tom of Warped and Twisted
was our was the sort of sectioned leader really.
He just went bang bang and then we just whipped into line thinking that was our cue and we
started marching out of this underground car park and we arrived about ten minutes early.
Sounds like carnival doesn't it?
Yeah.
They were furious weren't they?
And obviously we weren't going to stop and there was a bit of a, I wouldn't call it a
Mexican stand off.
Sound clash at the very least.
Lamar started shouting didn't he between every jab jab he would shout what he was going
to do to people and jab jab where he's going to do it, jab jab.
The best one was I'm going to use Mike Chubb's head as a football I see.
We all just cheered really loudly.
Poor Mike, he just looked crestfallen didn't he?
Juve was absolutely great.
It was the spirit yeah which I really loved that it was just like let's just go for it.
They were dark carnivals compared to the carnivals there are now but I think I felt that they
came from a punk era very much and we were all of the same mind and for me I felt very
comfortable in that kind of thing.
They were far more libertarian in that sense do you think?
Well they didn't follow a norm did they?
It wasn't carnival in that sense, it was carnival of people of the city of Cardiff and all the
all their pasts all together it's not like right we're going to have a nice red section
we're going to have a nice blue section and this is going to be you know represent the
sea it was a lot of individualism and it was just like what do you want to be what should
we do and you just decided it was very free.
I mean you had a Mark as Paulie was talking about early on you know with the tan there
was two rooms so you had two different sections of carnival really as well so you had a Maru
section which was a lot more traditional.
There was a lot more sewing going on.
A lot more sewing yeah and then of course in the other section it was just spray paint
which was just so toxic in there people on one side would moan constantly because they
were smoking fags and and spraying really stinky paint everywhere.
It was plastic and yeah burning of plastic, ripping of gaffer tape and it was just was
really quite creative.
It was creative but very dark and I think probably well I just love that's what I love.
I think you have a punk ethic as you were saying.
It really did.
It was our era wasn't it and I suppose it was stuff we'd never really done or I'd never
really done before.
No no we were able to do it weren't you.
Meeting great people that we'd never met before and they're still really close friends now
People like Mareaga we met then, Gareth we met through the mass, we met Tom and Ali,
we met Spike you know all those people Ben, Jude and Shona all those people we met through
the mass.
But also on the other side was Alva and Maru.
And Sally and Adrian was always in an interesting position because he had his Powys sort of
connection and Adrian liked, you obviously had Simon you know with the Cardiff Samba
band and Adrian had his small carnival troupe.
Nice bit of rivalry there.
Plus you know Bristol coming over, bristling of you know strutting of leaders who can lead
the best.
And then Swansea always really great with their Celtic sort of West Walyan thing.
Yeah no it's all good.
And of course 1995 as it is was the Well of Wisdom which was an early attempt to not mainly
have a parade but to put on a presentation that tried to move towards carnival theatre
or told a story and certainly in those early days and you already mentioned ending up in
the Hayes on one occasion there was a whole period where the final carnival presentation
happened on the steps of the National Museum.
Tell us about that experience.
I mean a fabulous backdrop and it was a nice area wasn't it because people could crowd
around and then you could perform.
You've got a great performance space area there and it's huge.
Good sight lines.
So you've got loads of people can see it.
It's quite flattering as a performer because you are up quite high.
And yeah you're up high you could move up and down the steps.
There were some great fireworks going on.
Oh really nice and the kids again really enjoying that except for when Jim decided he needed a wee
and he went I said just go behind that pillar Jim it's fine you know in the middle of the show
and so he starts having a wee and suddenly the the rain you know fireworks started firing down on
him and yeah it was tricky for him bless him he was caught it was a bit traumatic yeah but
it's just such a great there was no burning involved was there oh it was just a bounce here
and there a bounce of a spark it was enough to eat yeah did worry he worried it he was only about
four at the time he worried him slightly but hey he came back the next year he wasn't you know put
off but though a really nice and also finishing in the night yes really good yes really great
because in the daytime it's lovely but it was such an atmosphere it was a great atmosphere and it
looked like there was a show happening yeah and there was a bit of a celeb thing going on for a
while with Benjamin Zephaniah did you get to work with him or well yeah we you were a chanter
were you a chanter I think I might have was like yeah yes I was a chanter terrible memory
I know I remember working and singing the songs with Benjamin I really enjoyed that a lot that
was nice because it wasn't anything to do with the band or you know it was just doing something
for myself and it was really good that was the first time ever we decided we needed to get the
spoken son or chanted word into it yeah Marianne was always very good you know I know we always
had songs I suppose you're right yeah it was a chance to try and move that was more of a narrative
wasn't it yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and one of the key players in that piece of theatre was
played by yourself Paul oh dear would you get to know us about your character well I was taking
a little sabbatical from work and uh which was great really good and you kindly offered me the
the chance of a a character part uh one that didn't actually involve too much technical dancing so I
was quite pleased with that and it was quite a dark character uh I think it was called the tempter
or the book man and uh it also involved growing a diabolical goatee beard which flattered me a bit
um yeah so I was there with uh the scales of uh of justice and the book of judgment
massive great horns and nice devil wings that had been made for me and uh I think I was I was trying
to tempt and nowadays perhaps you might be particularly politically incorrect but I was
supposed to be tempting the young people into uh into uh evil ways but all in the best possible
taste yes I assured you know that was great because it gave me the chance rather than I mean
the dancing and and learning the drumming patterns and that kind of stuff is great but developing a
character and just thinking about what am I going to be what are we going to be like I'm just hearing
you through the PA annunciating those words and there has to be an audience of three four five
thousand people watching it I mean and the communication they you know you were great they
understood every word there was there was conveyed meaning going on you know I mean parading is great
and will always be the backbone of what a carnival does but it's good to explore other things no
definitely I mean one epic moment for me is uh everyone in Cardiff know associated with carnival
or cardiff people will know ninja and uh I can't remember which year it was but I think it might
have been like the the year after that in about 97 or something where um uh Tom I think it was
developed this idea of run de mental which was basically um it wasn't it was sorry it was Chris's
idea he saw it in in in brazil and brought it back it was Chris's idea yeah so the idea was to
create a section that didn't necessarily follow the route of the carnival um and so you would
form a little tableau and drum like mental and then run like mental and there wouldn't be any
plan as to where you were going to run it was just uh I think I can't remember perhaps it was Chris
who's just Chris led it Chris led it you just hair off and the uh this poor stewards from the council
I think you know they've been a small posse assembled to mind our section but we were very
well behaved I think and that's the year that I think gareth met Mareaga so quite a famous year
in that respect um you were taking photos weren't you you weren't actually in it yeah I was doing
first aid as well they were a couple of injuries and uh um they were body painters weren't they
black and white we had lovely black and white body paint we had trained for weeks to do run
de mental if you're thinking about a whole gang of smoking drinking did you want to try and get
oh my god we had fish came over he was our trainer we had to meet three months beforehand
every Wednesday night Chris got us in and said right if we're going to do this we're actually
going to bloody do it and it means you've all got to learn how to run I'd never run in my life
so Mareaga and and fish down at the tan center every Wednesday or whatever it was
running around the bloody car park doing press-ups doing sit-ups we'd never done anything like that
always having a fag in between you know but it we really worked really bloody hard and I
this is the fittest I tell you it's the fittest I have ever been we bought special drums they were
flown over weren't they from Brazil I think really light wooden drums skin drums and we have beaters
and it and Chris did about three or four different rhythms and we had to train throwing
their running as playing and throwing drums all at the same time which for all of us the first day
yeah and there was quite a bit of face paint malfunction as well as people getting
face paint in their eyes and stuff like that but it ended up on the steps of the museum and like
as Nikki said I actually thought I was in the section but now I remember that I wasn't and
that's the funny thing about mass because sometimes you think you're doing something and
people say no you weren't actually you didn't think you were doing anything and people said no I saw
you I've got 25 years of that man yeah but they're just an epic moment for me because I also had a
video camera and it was back in 97 so it's a fairly rudimental run to mental camera
but Ninja who is the first time I'd ever really met him and I'd got to know him a bit
through the Cardiff festival and stuff like that but he just he got on the stage and he launched
into this freeform unrehearsed poetry about Ninja Pendragon and yeah yeah it was just a great moment
for me that yes just so funny and Tom invited him out of the audience to rap because he saw
him in the audience and he just came forward and off he went and we all performed around him
spontaneity the whole thing and it's all based on sort of friendship and
Cardiff's a great place and you'll remember the the Cardiff festival in those days there was some
stuff that brought a lot of people together like Hayes Alive and the Children's Festival and those
kind of stuff and yeah it's a nice meeting of minds really sounds wonderful
just for posterity if future generations listen to you
how do you sum up the value of the whole experience why was it worth doing
what was it all about why are we here I think it's a wonderful way for people to make a lot
of good friends really great friends I think it's a wonderful way for people who've never done
any kind of you know performing to start off small and amazingly after 10 years are probably
leading a whole section because people you know it's it's infectious it's easy and it's fun
I think it was a very inclusive place as well and I mean I still I haven't really seen a lot of Keith
since stopping doing the mass I mean I still see him around occasionally but he was a dear friend
who you think of someone like him I doubt he as a deaf gentleman I don't think originally homeless
and yeah problem and special needs which indirectly we helped to impact on and yet he became a real
integral part yeah almost not like a mascot but you know he was just a guy that you expected to
be at the mass and he was able to really express his creative side provided he was allowed to be
a large lady in high heel shoes with a 22 out of 25 smear of red lipstick
you think of people like who are the two girls that turned up with no clothes on at all
totally bare breath they did they basically shoved some snakes tongue in their mouth
appears as serpents I love yeah it was only until the brain occurred to us that they'd done the
whole thing bare-breasted yeah I was just you know fine pushing the envelope wasn't it I think they
were building up to it for a couple of years they had done they had done it a few years but yeah
this is that was the first time you saw them well because they were sprayed gold they sort of got
away with it you had to get quite close but I remember them catching up to a policeman who
as it was happening he suddenly realized that they weren't wearing anything
I love the belly button either you know it's just very unusual and I mean another thing in terms of
professional development you know you think of someone like Caroline who is always a keen dancer
and you know very interested in performance but from her kids doing you know circus school
and that sort of stuff she got into it herself studied learning to do the the I don't know what
it's called the metal stair yeah and then becoming I mean she was really the face of the mass for so
many years wouldn't she they always the echo always managed to find a picture she's got a lovely face
but you know now professional carnival artists
but they're you know I mean and there were people like obviously Maryann who were
professional performers in their own right but a lot of people as Nicky said got their first chance
to do something without perhaps thinking I am an artist but after a few years they're recognized as
as leaders in their field so you'll see Caroline at you know festivals all over the UK
Richard Hugh Morgan who's now in the experimental group we've got back up
yeah through the Breathe Golf experience which has made that his first time he'd ever performed in his
life was in the precursor to Swicko in Theaters of Tally Esse in Wales' Maddox Community Play
the first time he ever performed and that one thing that's amazing that's strange yeah yeah
on that note Paul and Nicky Keating I wish to thank you for harvesting your memories and to
declare you not separately but jointly Cardiff Parnell Heroes thank you very much